README.md, before:

# 🧠 ADRD Deep Phenotyping: Knowledge Graph-Enhanced Detection System

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9%2B-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.104%2B-green)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Production%20Ready-success)]()

**State-of-the-art Alzheimer's Disease detection using Knowledge Graphs and Graph Neural Networks**

---

## 🎯 Overview

This system implements a novel **knowledge graph-enhanced framework** for deep phenotyping of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias (ADRD). By leveraging biomedical ontologies, standardized terminologies (OMOP CDM v5), and Graph Neural Networks, we achieve **state-of-the-art performance (AUC 0.954)** while maintaining clinical realism and interpretability.

### ✨ Key Features

- 🏆 **State-of-the-Art Performance:** AUC 0.954, 86% sensitivity/specificity
- ⚡ **Fast & Scalable:** 3.5ms per patient, ready for millions
- 🔬 **Ontology-Driven:** OMOP CDM v5 compliant with 5 standardized vocabularies
- 📊 **Comprehensive Data:** 7 EHR data types (130K+ clinical records)
- 🧠 **Graph Neural Networks:** 92,869 clinical relationships across 514 nodes
- 💡 **Interpretable:** Graph-based explanations for all predictions
- 🌐 **Production Ready:** FastAPI web application with REST API

---

## 📚 Quick Access Documentation

| Document | Description | Purpose |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| **[PLAYBOOK.md](PLAYBOOK.md)** | **START HERE** - Complete user guide | Installation, setup, running the system |
| **[RESEARCH_PAPER.md](RESEARCH_PAPER.md)** | Full research paper (4,200+ words) | Publication-ready manuscript |
| **[REALISTIC_PERFORMANCE_RESULTS.md](REALISTIC_PERFORMANCE_RESULTS.md)** | Detailed performance analysis | Metrics, error analysis, validation |

---

## ⚡ Quick Start

```bash
# 1. Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# 2. Run evaluation
python comprehensive_classification_evaluation.py

# 3. Generate visualizations
python create_paper_visualizations_simple.py

# 4. Start web app
python run.py
```

**📖 See [PLAYBOOK.md](PLAYBOOK.md) for complete instructions**

---

## 📊 Performance Highlights

| Metric | Value | Clinical Interpretation |
|--------|-------|------------------------|
| **AUC-ROC** | **0.954** | Excellent (0.90-0.95 range) |
| **Accuracy** | **86%** | Realistic for clinical practice |
| **Sensitivity** | **86%** | Detects 43 of 50 AD cases |
| **Specificity** | **86%** | Identifies 43 of 50 controls |
| **Processing** | **~4ms/patient** | Production-ready speed |

### Graph Statistics
- **514 nodes:** 400 patients + 114 medical concepts
- **92,869 edges:** Clinical relationships
- **712 comorbidity edges:** Disease co-occurrences
- **7 data types:** Demographics, diagnoses, medications, labs, imaging, treatments, vitals
- **130,058 records:** Comprehensive EHR

---

## 🏗️ Project Structure

```
📁 adehr_phenotype-master/
├── 📄 README.md                    ← You are here
├── 📖 PLAYBOOK.md                  ← Complete user guide
├── 📝 RESEARCH_PAPER.md            ← Publication manuscript
│
├── 🐍 Essential Scripts
│   ├── run.py                      ← Start web app
│   ├── comprehensive_classification_evaluation.py
│   ├── create_paper_visualizations_simple.py
│   └── generate_comprehensive_ontology_data.py
│
├── 📁 app/                         ← FastAPI application
│   ├── services/
│   │   ├── knowledge_graph_baseline.py  ← Main model ⭐
│   │   ├── data_loader.py
│   │   └── ...
│   └── api/                        ← REST endpoints
│
├── 📊 Data/                        ← 14 CSV files (130K records)
├── 🖼️ paper_figures/               ← 7 publication figures
└── 🧪 tests/                       ← Unit tests
```

---

## 🔬 Innovation Highlights

1. **First** comprehensive OntoCodex + OMOP CDM v5 integration for ADRD
2. **Knowledge graph** with 92,869 clinical relationships  
3. **Graph Neural Networks** (GAT) for risk prediction
4. **24 evidence-based** ADRD risk factors with literature weights
5. **7 comprehensive** EHR data types (vs typical 2-3)
6. **State-of-the-art** AUC 0.954 with clinical realism
7. **Interpretable** graph-based explanations
8. **Scalable** to millions of patients

---

## 🎯 Ready For

✅ Academic Publication  
✅ Clinical Deployment  
✅ Research Studies  
✅ Grant Applications  
✅ Conference Presentations  
✅ Open Source Release  

---

## 📞 Support

**Getting Started:**
1. Read [PLAYBOOK.md](PLAYBOOK.md) for installation
2. Review [RESEARCH_PAPER.md](RESEARCH_PAPER.md) for methods
3. Check [REALISTIC_PERFORMANCE_RESULTS.md](REALISTIC_PERFORMANCE_RESULTS.md) for validation

**Common Issues:** See PLAYBOOK.md Troubleshooting section

---

**Version:** 1.0 (Production Ready)  
**Last Updated:** December 3, 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Complete and validated

**For detailed research paper, methodology, and results, see [RESEARCH_PAPER.md](RESEARCH_PAPER.md)**

Commit message:

docs: Remove references to RESEARCH_PAPER.md

README.md, after:

# 🧠 ADRD Deep Phenotyping: Knowledge Graph-Enhanced Detection System

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9%2B-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.104%2B-green)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Production%20Ready-success)]()

**State-of-the-art Alzheimer's Disease detection using Knowledge Graphs and Graph Neural Networks**

---

## 🎯 Overview

This system implements a novel **knowledge graph-enhanced framework** for deep phenotyping of Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias (ADRD). By leveraging biomedical ontologies, standardized terminologies (OMOP CDM v5), and Graph Neural Networks, we achieve **state-of-the-art performance (AUC 0.954)** while maintaining clinical realism and interpretability.

### ✨ Key Features

- 🏆 **State-of-the-Art Performance:** AUC 0.954, 86% sensitivity/specificity
- ⚡ **Fast & Scalable:** 3.5ms per patient, ready for millions
- 🔬 **Ontology-Driven:** OMOP CDM v5 compliant with 5 standardized vocabularies
- 📊 **Comprehensive Data:** 7 EHR data types (130K+ clinical records)
- 🧠 **Graph Neural Networks:** 92,869 clinical relationships across 514 nodes
- 💡 **Interpretable:** Graph-based explanations for all predictions
- 🌐 **Production Ready:** FastAPI web application with REST API

---

## 📚 Quick Access Documentation

| Document | Description | Purpose |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| **[PLAYBOOK.md](PLAYBOOK.md)** | **START HERE** - Complete user guide | Installation, setup, running the system |
| **[WEB_INTERFACE_GUIDE.md](WEB_INTERFACE_GUIDE.md)** | Web UI guide | Visual interface tutorial |

---

## ⚡ Quick Start

```bash
# 1. Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# 2. Run evaluation
python comprehensive_classification_evaluation.py

# 3. Generate visualizations
python create_paper_visualizations_simple.py

# 4. Start web app
python run.py
```

**📖 See [PLAYBOOK.md](PLAYBOOK.md) for complete instructions**

---

## 📊 Performance Highlights

| Metric | Value | Clinical Interpretation |
|--------|-------|------------------------|
| **AUC-ROC** | **0.954** | Excellent (0.90-0.95 range) |
| **Accuracy** | **86%** | Realistic for clinical practice |
| **Sensitivity** | **86%** | Detects 43 of 50 AD cases |
| **Specificity** | **86%** | Identifies 43 of 50 controls |
| **Processing** | **~4ms/patient** | Production-ready speed |

### Graph Statistics
- **514 nodes:** 400 patients + 114 medical concepts
- **92,869 edges:** Clinical relationships
- **712 comorbidity edges:** Disease co-occurrences
- **7 data types:** Demographics, diagnoses, medications, labs, imaging, treatments, vitals
- **130,058 records:** Comprehensive EHR

---

## 🏗️ Project Structure

```
📁 adehr_phenotype-master/
├── 📄 README.md                    ← You are here
├── 📖 PLAYBOOK.md                  ← Complete user guide
├── 📖 WEB_INTERFACE_GUIDE.md       ← Web UI tutorial
│
├── 🐍 Essential Scripts
│   ├── run.py                      ← Start web app
│   ├── comprehensive_classification_evaluation.py
│   ├── create_paper_visualizations_simple.py
│   └── generate_comprehensive_ontology_data.py
│
├── 📁 app/                         ← FastAPI application
│   ├── services/
│   │   ├── knowledge_graph_baseline.py  ← Main model ⭐
│   │   ├── data_loader.py
│   │   └── ...
│   └── api/                        ← REST endpoints
│
├── 📊 Data/                        ← 14 CSV files (130K records)
└── 🧪 tests/                       ← Unit tests
```

---

## 🔬 Innovation Highlights

1. **First** comprehensive OntoCodex + OMOP CDM v5 integration for ADRD
2. **Knowledge graph** with 92,869 clinical relationships  
3. **Graph Neural Networks** (GAT) for risk prediction
4. **24 evidence-based** ADRD risk factors with literature weights
5. **7 comprehensive** EHR data types (vs typical 2-3)
6. **State-of-the-art** AUC 0.954 with clinical realism
7. **Interpretable** graph-based explanations
8. **Scalable** to millions of patients

---

## 🎯 Ready For

✅ Academic Publication  
✅ Clinical Deployment  
✅ Research Studies  
✅ Grant Applications  
✅ Conference Presentations  
✅ Open Source Release  

---

## 📞 Support

**Getting Started:**
1. Read [PLAYBOOK.md](PLAYBOOK.md) for installation and setup
2. Review [WEB_INTERFACE_GUIDE.md](WEB_INTERFACE_GUIDE.md) for web UI tutorial
3. Run tests with `pytest` to verify installation

**Common Issues:** See PLAYBOOK.md Troubleshooting section

---

**Version:** 1.0 (Production Ready)  
**Last Updated:** December 3, 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Complete and validated
